=== PAGE 1 ===
Adoption of the effective interest rate (EIR) and the 
reducing balance method as the interest calculation 
for all types of hire-purchase financing (page 2)
Replacement of the term Base Lending Rate 
with Reference Rate (page 4)
Usage of the EIR and updates to the maximum 
rates for hire-purchase financing (page 5)
Introduction of a grace period for system 
enhancements (page 6)
Consumer Guide:  
Five Key Highlights of the 
Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Act 2026  
Flexibility to opt for electronic or digital signatures 
and to receive hire-purchase agreements and 
related documents electronically (page 3)

=== PAGE 2 ===
2 | Consumer Guide on the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Act 2026
Adoption of the effective interest rate (EIR) and the 
reducing balance method as the interest calculation for 
all types of hire-purchase financing
So, what is the EIR?  
EIR is the actual percentage of interest you pay over the financing tenure. It reflects the amount 
of interest you pay based on your outstanding loan balance at any given time, when you pay your 
monthly instalments. Sometimes, a hire-purchase provider will quote a flat rate to consumers, 
which appears cheaper. But, this does not result in lower monthly instalments.
For example, let’s assume you borrow RM100,000 over a period of 9 years (or 108 months).
Under the reducing balance method, interest charges will be calculated based on the 
outstanding principal amount. This helps you see from your monthly instalment, how 
much of that amount is for interest charges and how much is for the principal repayment.  
  
•	 Interest	charges: Calculated based on your outstanding principal amount  
•	 Principal	repayment: Balance remaining from your monthly instalments (less interest charges)   
 which will be allocated to r epay your outstanding principal amount 
 
Hire-purchase providers will use the EIR together with the reducing balance method in the 
calculation of interest charges. 
Hire-Purchase	
Financing Rate Quoted Monthly Instalment* Total Interest
Bank A Flat rate of 3% p.a. RM1,175.93 RM27,000
Bank B EIR of 5.5% p.a. RM1,175.93 RM27,000
Bank C EIR of 5% p.a. RM1,151.76 RM24,390
*Will differ depending on your loan tenure
The above example illustrates that your monthly instalment remains the same with both Bank 
A and Bank B, where you end up paying a monthly instalment of RM1,175.93 and the same 
total interest of RM27,000. With Bank C, you end up paying a lower monthly instalment of 
RM1,151.76 and a lower total interest of RM24,390. For a loan with a 9-year tenure, an EIR of 
5.5% p.a. is equivalent to a flat rate of 3% p.a.
Hence, even though the flat rate may appear cheaper at first glance, it does not reflect the 
true cost of financing costs borne by you. It actually makes the hire-purchase product seem 
cheaper than it really is. 
To prevent unexpected outcomes and to compare rates accurately, always ask the  
hire-purchase provider for the EIR. 
Remember, it is important that you understand all key features, charges, terms  
and conditions of the hire-purchase financing agreement before you sign it!


=== PAGE 3 ===
3 | Consumer Guide on the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Act 2026
Y ou	can	continue	to	choose	either	fixed	rate	or	variable	rate	hire-purchase	financing.
While both these types of financing will adopt the reducing balance method for interest 
calculation, the key	differences between these two rates include:
Fixed rate financing
• The interest rate stays the same for the
entire financing period
• Your monthly instalments will also stay
the same, making it easier to plan your
monthly budgets
• This option is great if you prefer certainty
in monthly expenditures
Variable rate financing
• The interest rate can change (go up or
down) over time based on upward or
downward movements in the Overnight
Policy Rate (OPR)
• Your monthly instalments can go up
or down, depending on interest rate
changes
• This option is great if you’re looking for
possible savings if interest rates go down
Flexibility to opt for electronic or digital signatures 
and to receive hire-purchase agreements and related 
documents electronically
Electronic signature Digital signature
Legal 
definition
Any letter, character, number, 
sound or any other symbol or any 
combination thereof created in an 
electronic form adopted by a person 
as a signature, as set out under the 
Electronic Commerce Act 2006
A transformation of a message 
using an asymmetric cryptosystem 
such that a person having the initial 
message and the signer’
s public key 
can accurately determine: (a) whether 
the transformation was created using 
the private key that corresponds 
to the signer’s public key; and (b) 
whether the message has been 
altered since the transformation was 
made, as set out under the Digital 
Signature Act 1997
Key 
difference
It can be as simple as typing a name 
or inserting an image of a signature. 
To verify the signer’s identity and 
protect against fraud, the signer’s 
physical presence will be required for 
the initial signing of a hire-purchase 
agreement
It uses encryption technology and 
digital certificates to authenticate and 
verify the identity of the signer


=== PAGE 4 ===
4 | Consumer Guide on the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Act 2026
Benefits How to sign
Convenience: Sign hire-purchase 
agreements anywhere*
Speed: Faster loan processing
Security: Secure and legally binding
Receive: Review the hire-purchase 
agreement electronically or digitally
Sign: E-sign or digitally sign the  
hire-purchase agreement 
Confirm: Receive a softcopy or 
hardcopy of your signed agreement**
How does the above flexibility benefit you as a consumer?
* Regar dless of the method used to sign a hire-purchase agreement, hire-purchase 
providers are required to carry out proper due diligence on the prospective customer.  
In some cases, this will require the prospective customer’s physical presence for the 
initial signing of a hire-purchase agreement.
** The method of delivering hir e-purchase documents, either electronically or via hardcopy, 
must be clearly stated and mutually agreed upon in the hire-purchase agreement. This 
ensures transparency and a shared understanding between the hire-purchase provider 
and you as the customer.
Replacement of the term Base Lending Rate with 
Reference Rate
The term Base Lending Rate has been replaced with Reference Rate. This involves 
operational amendments to the relevant provisions in the Hire-Purchase Act 1967, in line 
with several enhancements made to Bank Negara Malaysia’s Reference Rate Framework 
in 2015 and 2022. (Click here to read more about BNM’s Reference Rate Framework)


=== PAGE 5 ===
5 | Consumer Guide on the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Act 2026
Usage of the EIR updates to the maximum rates for 
hire-purchase financing  (Set out under the revised Hire-Purchase 
(Term Charges) Regulations)
Hire-purchase providers will use the EIR moving forward, which provides a more 
transparent and accurate reflection of the true cost of the hire-purchase financing.
While flat rate offers 
might look cheaper, it 
does not show the true 
cost of financing. EIR 
gives a clearer picture of 
what you are paying.
Transparency
You are only charged 
interest on what you 
still owe, which is the 
remaining principal 
balance. The amount 
of interest charged 
reduces with each 
monthly instalment 
repayment.
Fairer interest charges
Helps you become 
a smarter shopper! 
You can do 
apple-to-apple 
comparison of 
rates offered by 
different hire-
purchase providers.
Informed decisions
What	updates	were	made	to	the	maximum	rates	for	hire-purchase	financing?
For fixed	rate	financing, the existing maximum flat rate of 10% p.a. has been replaced with its 
corresponding EIR based on loan tenures. For variable	rate	financing, the existing maximum 
EIR of 17% p.a. has been retained. Hire-purchase financing contracted under variable rates are 
already subject to reducing balance method under the existing Hire-Purchase Act 1967.
Fixed	rate	financing
The EIR is capped at 17% p.a. for loans 
with tenures of up to 5 years and  
16% p.a. for loans with tenures of 
more than 5 years*
Variable	rate	financing
The EIR is capped at 17% p.a. for all 
loan tenures as per the existing  
Hire-Purchase (Term Charges) 
Regulations 2005
* The maximum rates ar e set based on the conversion from flat rate to EIR, which is  
determined by the loan tenure. This ensures that the corresponding EIRs do not exceed the 
existing maximum flat rate of 10% p.a. The maximum threshold of EIR 17% p.a. has been 
assessed as an adequate consumer safeguard against excessive interest charges. This 
threshold is subject to periodic review by the authorities to ensure it remains fit-for-purpose.


=== PAGE 6 ===
6 | Consumer Guide on the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Act 2026
Introduction of a grace period for system and 
infrastructure enhancements
The effective date of the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Act 2026 is 1 June 2026*. From this 
date, hire-purchase providers will be given a grace period until 31 March 2027 to conduct the 
necessary systems and infrastructure enhancements in implementing the reducing balance 
method and pricing in EIR. 
This means that hire-purchase companies that are ready to use the new reducing 
balance method earlier can start doing so anytime during the grace period, 
beginning from the date the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Act 2026 comes into 
effect.
If you want to enjoy the benefits of the new reducing balance method, you can 
look for packages offered by these early adopters. Be proactive by comparing your 
options and choose what works best for you.
Most importantly, remember to ask the hire-purchase company whether they have 
already switched to the new method!
*As announced by the Ministry of Domestic Trade and Cost of Living (KPDN)

=== PAGE 7 ===
7 |  Company  Profile
7  |  Company  Proﬁle
Check the hire-purchase providers’ website or app, or go to their branch
Review the latest oﬀerings of ﬁxed and/or variable rate hire-purchase ﬁnancing
Explore your options
Shop around, ask ‘What’s the EIR?’ and compare the EIR oﬀered by several hire-purchase 
providers before accepting any oﬀer
Check your finances
Have enough funds not only to cover the upfront 10% down payment but also the monthly 
instalments throughout the ﬁnancing tenure, including other related costs such as 
insurance/takaful, road tax and vehicle maintenance
Review the hire-purchase agreement
Carefully read the hire-purchase agreement, product disclosure sheet and any other 
disclosure materials to fully understand your obligations and your rights
Sign the hire-purchase agreement
If you agree to the terms and conditions, sign the hire-purchase agreement and ensure you 
receive a hardcopy or softcopy of the signed agreement
Pay your monthly instalments on time
Make timely payments on your monthly instalments and ﬁnancial obligations to avoid 
unnecessary fees or charges, which can increase your overall cost of ﬁnancing
PRO TIP: Thinking of opting for hire-purchase? Here’s how to get started!
 
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
Know your redress options 
If you are dissatisfied with the product or service, contact your hire-purchase provider to 
lodge a complaint. If you disagree with the final decision, you may follow these steps:
(a) If your hir e-purchase provider is regulated by Bank Negara Malaysia, you may escalate 
your complaint to the Financial Markets Ombudsman Service (FMOS) (Click here to 
learn more about FMOS) or BNMLINK
(b) If your hir e-purchase provider is a non-bank, you may lodge a complaint to the 
Ministry of Domestic Trade and Cost of Living (KPDN) via KPDN’s e-complaint portal  
(https://eaduan.kpdn.gov.my/), toll-free number (1-800-886-800) or email  
(e-aduan@kpdn.gov.my), or send a letter to or visit the nearest KPDN office

=== PAGE 8 ===
8 | Consumer Guide on the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Act 2026
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
1
Why is the reducing balance method being adopted 
for	fixed	rate	loans	under	the	Hire-Purchase	
(Amendment) Act 2026? 
 
The reducing balance method replaces the Rule of 78 
method. The method of computation applied determines 
how interest charges are allocated throughout the tenure 
of a loan.  
 
The Rule of 78 method frontloads interest payments, 
resulting in higher initial interest costs and a larger 
outstanding principal amount due in the event of early 
settlements. The fixed rate formula under the existing 
Hire-Purchase Act 1967 uses the flat rate method, which 
computes interest based on the original loan amount 
throughout the repayment tenure. This means that in 
the early years of your loan, for example, up to the third 
year of a 9-year plan, most of your monthly payments go 
towards paying interest, not reducing the loan amount. 
So, your balance goes down by a smaller portion at the 
beginning. 
 
The reducing balance method has been applied for 
variable rate hire-purchase financing all this while 
under the existing Hire-Purchase Act 1967 and is now 
streamlined to be adopted for fixed rate hire-purchase 
financing under the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Act 
2026. As at December 2024, variable rate hire-purchase 
financing accounts for 15% of hire-purchase offerings 
by banks. The move to the reducing balance method 
is intended to ensure fairer outcomes for customers, 
particularly those who settle their loans early. With this 
method, interest is only charged on the remaining unpaid 
principal balance. So, more of your monthly instalments 
goes towards reducing the actual loan, which means 
your balance goes down faster each month throughout 
the loan period. 
 
The reducing balance method is a more transparent 
measure of pricing as it is more accurately reflects the 
actual cost of financing borne by customers, while 
ensuring fairer outcomes for consumers.
2
How does the reducing balance method adopted 
by	hire-purchase	providers	benefit	customers? 
 
The reducing balance method charges interest on 
the customer’s outstanding principal balance each 
month, resulting in fairer interest charges as interest 
will only be charged on the current amount that is 
owed, which in turn progressively reduces with each 
monthly instalment paid. 
3
With	the	abolishment	of	the	flat	rate	formula	
for the calculation of interest charges, will this 
mean	that	hire-purchase	providers	will	only	offer	
variable rate loans moving forward? 
 
No, the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Act 2026 
continues to allow hire-purchase providers to offer 
both fixed rate and variable rate loans. Customers 
will continue to have the option to choose a fixed rate 
or variable rate hire-purchase loan. 
4
How	do	I	know	if	the	interest	rate	offered	to	me	 
is reasonable? 
 
Moving forward under the Hire-Purchase 
(Amendment) Act 2026, hire-purchase providers will 
begin using the EIR instead of the flat rate. 
The EIR shows the true cost of your loan for the 
duration of the financing tenure. It takes into account 
the amount of interest you pay based on your 
outstanding loan balance at any given time after 
accounting for monthly repayments. The EIR gives a 
clearer and more accurate picture for the purpose of 
rate comparison. Shop around to find the best deals 
that meet your specific financing needs.
8 | Consumer Guide on the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Act 2026

=== PAGE 9 ===
9 | Consumer Guide on the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Act 2026
5
Will	hir e-purchase 	pr oviders 	perform 	any 	verifications 	
on prospective customers before entering into a hire-
purchase agreement?
Prior to entering into a hire-purchase agreement, 
hire-purchase providers are required to conduct 
the necessary due diligence to verify the identity of 
the prospective customer. To do this, hire-purchase 
providers will request for relevant information and 
identification documents from you, such as, your full 
name as per National Registration Identity Card (NRIC) 
or passport or any other official document issued 
by an authorised body that can be used to verify a 
person’s identity, NRIC or passport or any other official 
documents, residential and mailing address, and  
contact number.  
 
Hire-purchase providers will then verify the identity of the 
prospective customer through appropriate verification 
methods, such as verification of the prospective 
customer’s thumbprint via a biometric reader, or usage 
of a facial recognition system. This verification process 
will not only be conducted at the point of on-boarding, 
but also for transactions which require explicit customer 
agreement, such as, for any alterations to an existing 
hire-purchase agreement. Such measures serve as 
safeguards against fraudulent practices.
6
If I sign a hire-purchase agreement electronically or 
digitally, will my hire-purchase agreement be sent to me 
electronically?
Hire-purchase providers now have the option to 
issue hire-purchase documents and notices through 
electronic channels. However, specific to the delivery 
of hire-purchase agreements or contracts, the method 
of delivery (electronically or hardcopy) must be clearly 
stated and mutually agreed upon in the hire-purchase 
agreement.  
 
This ensures transparency and promotes mutual 
understanding between the hire-purchase provider 
and you, the hirer. You can request for a physical copy 
of your hire-purchase agreement if this is preferred.
7
Will	hire-purchase	providers	continue	to	offer	a	
rebate if the customer settles their loan early? 
 
Hire-purchase providers will no longer offer rebates 
at the point of early settlement to customers who 
have contracted hire-purchase agreements under the 
new provisions of the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) 
Act 2026.  
Under the Hire-Purchase Act 1967, when a customer 
settles their hire-purchase loan early, the hire-purchase 
providers typically waive the interest for the remaining 
months in the financing tenure, which is termed as a 
statutory rebate.  
 
Under the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Act 2026, 
both fixed rate and variable rate loans will adopt 
the reducing balance method, where interest is 
calculated on the customer’s outstanding principal 
balance. Once the customer pays off the outstanding 
balance, no further interest charges subsequently 
accrue. Hence, the need for such a waiver or rebate 
does not arise.
8
How	do	the	changes 	to	the	Hire-Purchase 	Act	
1967 affect existing hire-purchase agreements?  
 
The changes made to the existing provisions under 
the Hire-Purchase Act 1967 will only apply to new 
hire-purchase agreements secured after the Hire-
Purchase (Amendment) Act 2026 takes effect. 
Existing hire-purchase agreements signed under the 
Hire-Purchase Act 1967 will continue to follow the 
original contractual terms and conditions. 
Notwithstanding, the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) 
Act 2026 provides the flexibility for you and your 
hire-purchase provider to mutually agree to elect the 
method of calculating the net balance due under the 
hire-purchase agreement in accordance with the  
Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Act 2026. This will 
be subject to the readiness of the hire-purchase 
provider to perform interest calculations using the 
reducing balance method pending enhancements to 
their existing systems.
9 | Consumer Guide on the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Act 2026

=== PAGE 10 ===
10 | Consumer Guide on the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Act 2026
9
Why	are	the	changes 	to	the	Hire-Purchase 	Act	
1967 being introduced now?
To enhance protection for credit consumers, the 
government, through the Ministry of Finance, has 
introduced the Consumer Credit Act 2025. Adopting 
a whole-of-government approach, KPDN also 
undertook a review of the Hire-Purchase Act 1967 to 
identify and address unfair practices towards credit 
consumers. One key area of concern was the use 
of the Rule of 78 method under the Hire-Purchase 
Act 1967, which has been widely criticised for being 
inequitable, particularly for customers who repay 
their loans early. In response, many countries have 
banned its use due to its inherent unfairness to credit 
consumers and Malaysia is now aligned with global 
best practices.
10
If I have a query or complaint on my dealings with 
hire-purchase providers relating to the roll-out 
of	the	new	provisions	under	the	Hire-Purchase	
(Amendment) Act 2026, whom do I turn to? 
 
If you have a query or complaint relating to the  
roll-out of the new provisions under the Hire-Purchase  
(Amendment) Act 2026, you may contact your hire-
purchase provider directly to submit the query or 
lodge the complaint.  
 
KPDN remains as the regulatory and supervisory 
authority of all hire-purchase agreements under the 
Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Act 2026. Hence, if your 
query or complaint with your hire-purchase provider 
is not addressed, you may also reach out to KPDN 
via KPDN’s e-complaint portal (https://eaduan.kpdn.
gov.my/), toll-free number (1-800-886-800) or email 
(e-aduan@kpdn.gov.my), or send a letter or visit the 
nearest KPDN office. 
If your hire-purchase provider is a banking institution, 
for unresolved queries or complaints you may reach 
out to the Financial Markets Ombudsman Service 
(FMOS) (Click here to learn more about FMOS) or 
BNMLINK.
10 | Consumer Guide on the Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Act 2026